Chapter 11: Zest



In this chapter I propose to deal with what seems to me the most universal and distinctive mark of happy men, namely zest. 
Perhaps the best way to understand what is meant by zest will be to consider the different ways in which men behave when they sit down to a meal.   There are those to whom a meal is merely a bore; no matter how excellent the food may be, they feel that it is uninteresting.  They have had excellent food before, probably at almost every meal they have eaten.  They have never known what it was to go without a meal until hunger became a raging passion, but have come to regard meals as merely conventional occurrences, dictated by the fashions of the society in which they live.  Like everything else, meals are tiresome, but it is no use to make a fuss, because nothing else will be less tiresome.  Then there are the invalids who eat from a sense of duty, because the doctor has told them that it is necessary to take a little nourishment in order to keep up their strength.  Then there are the epicures, who start hopefully, but find that nothing has been quite so well cooked as it ought to have been.  Then there are the gormandisers, who fall upon their food with eager rapacity, eat too much, and grow plethoric and stertorous.  Finally there are those who begin with a sound appetite, are glad of their food, eat until they have had enough, and then stop.  

Those who are set down before the feast of life have similar attitudes towards the good things which it offers.  The happy man corresponds to the last of our eaters.   What hunger is in relation to food, zest is in relation to iife.   The man who is bored with his meals corresponds to the victim of Byronic unhappiness.  The invalid who eats from a sense of duty corresporids to the ascetic, the gormandiser to the voluptuary.  The epicure corresponds to the fastidious person who condemns half the pleasures of life as unaesthetic.  Oddly enough, all these types, with the possible exception of the gormandiser, feel contempt for the man of healthy appetite and consider themselves his superior.  It seems to them vulgar to enjoy food because you are hungry or to enjoy life because it offers a variety of interesting spectacles and surprising experiences.  From the height of their disillusionment they look down upon those whom they despise as simple souls.  For my part I have no sympathy with this outlook.  All disenchantment is to me a malady, which, it is true, certain circumstances may render inevitable, but which none the less, when it occurs, is to be cured as soon as possible, not to be regarded as a higher form of wisdom.  
Suppose one man likes strawberries and another does not; in what respect is the latter superior?  There is no abstract and impersonal proof either that strawberries are good or that they are not good.  To the man who likes them they are good; to the man who dislikes them they are not.  But the man who likes them has a pleasure which the other does not have; to that extent his life is more enjoyable and he is better adapted to the world in which both must live.  What is true in this trivial instance is equally true in more important matters.  The man who enjoys watching fcotball is to that extent superior to the man who does not.  The man who enjoys reading is still more superior to the man who does not, since opportunities for reading are more frequent than opportunities for watchiug football.  The more things a man is interested in, the more opportunities of happiness he has, and the less he is at the mercy of fate, since if he loses one thing he can fall back upon another.  Life is too short to be interested in everything, but it is good to be interested in as many things as are necessary to fill our days.  We are all prone to the malady of the introvert, who, with the manifold spectacle of the world spread out before him, turns away and gazes only upon the emptiness within.  But let us not imagine that there is anything grand about the introvert's unhappiness. 


There were once upon a time two sausage machines, exquisitely constructed for the purpose of turning pig into the most delicious sausages. Å@One of these retained his zest for pig and produced sausages innumerable; the other said: 'What is pig to me?  My own works are far more interesting and wonderful than any pig.'   He refused pig and set to work to study his inside.  When bereft of its natural food, his inside ceased to function, and the more he studied it, the more empty and foolish it seemed to him to be.  All the exquisite apparatus by which the delicious transformation had hitherto been made stood still, and he was at a loss to guess what it was capable of doing.  This second sausage machine was like the man who has lost his zest, while the first was like the man who has retained it.  The mind is a strange machine which can combine the materials offered to it in the most astonishing ways, but without materials from the external world it is powerless, and unlike the sausage machine it must seize its materials for itself, since events only become experiences through the interest that we take in them: if they do not interest us, we are making nothing of them.  The man, therefore, whose attention is turned within finds nothing worthy of his notice, whereas the man whose attention is turned outward can find within, in those rare moments when he examines his soul, the most varied and interesting assortment of ingredients being dissected and recombined into beautiful or instructive patterns. 
The forms of zest are innumerable.  Sherlock Holmes, it may be remembered, picked up a hat which he happened to find lyirg in the street.  After looking at it for a moment he remarked that its owner had come down in the world as the result of drink, and that his wife was no longer so fond of him as she used to be.  Life could never be boring to a man to whom casual objects offered such a wealth of interest.  Think of the difierent things that may be noticed in the course of a country walk.  One man may be interested in the birds, another in the vegetation, another in the, geology, yet another in the agriculture, and so on.  Any one of these things is interesting if it interests you, and, other things being equal, the man who is interested in any one of them is a man better adapted to the world than the man who is not interested. 

How extraordinarily different, again, are the attitudes of difierent people to their fellow-men.  One man, in the course of a long train journey, will fail entirely to observe any of his fellow travellers while another will have summed them all up, analysed their characters, made a shrewd guess at their circumstances, and perhaps even ascertained the most secret histories of several of them. People differ just as much in what they feel towards others as in what they ascertain about them.  Some men find almost everybody boring, others quickly and easily develop a friendly feeling towards those with whom they are brought in contact, unless there is some definite reason for feeling otherwise. Take again such a matter as travel: some men will travel through many countries, going always to the best hotels, eating exactly the same food as they would eat at home, meeting the same idle rich whom they would meet at home, conversing on the same topics upon which they converse at their own dinner-table.  When they return, their only feeling is one of relief at having done with the boredom of expensive locomotion . Other men, wherever they go, see what is characteristic, make the acquaintance of people who typify the locality, observe whatever is of interest either historically or socially, eat the food of the country, learn its manners and its language, and come home with a new stock of pleasant thoughts for winter evenings. 


In all these different situations the man who has the zest for life has the advantage over the man who has none.  Even unpleasant experiences have their uses to him.  I am glad to have smelt a Chinese crowd and a Sicilian village, though I cannot pretend that my pleasure was very great at the moment.  Adventurous men enjoy shipwrecks, mutinies, earthquakes, conflagrations, and all kinds of unpleasant experiences, provided they do not go so far as to impair health.  They say to themselves in an earthquake, for example, 'So that is what an earthquake is like', and it gives them pleasure to have their knowledge of the world increased by this new item.  It would not be true to say that such men are not at the mercy of fate, for if they should lose their health they would be very likely to lose their zest at the same time, though this is by no means certain.  I have known men die at the end of years of slow torture, and yet retain their zest almost till the last moment.  Some forms of ill-health destroy zest, others do not.  I do not know whether the biochemists are able as yet to distinguish between these kinds.  Perhaps when biochemistry has made further advances we shall be able to take tablets that will ensure our feeling an interest in everything, but until that day comes we are compelled to depend upon common-sense observation of life to judge what are the causes that enable some men to take an interest in everything, while compelling others to take an interest in nothing. 


Zest is sometimes general, sometimes specialised.  It may be very specialised indeed.  Readers of Borrow may remember a character who occurs in Romany Rye.  He had lost his wife, to whom he was devoted, and felt for a time that life had grown utterly barren.  But he became interested in Chinese inscriptions on teapots and tea-chests, and by the aid of a French Chinese grammar, after learning French for the purpose, gradually managed to decipher them, thereby acquiring a new interest in life though he never used his Chinese knowledge for other purposes.  I have known men who were entirely absorbed in the endeavour to find out all about the Gnostic heresy, and other men whose principal interest lay in collating the manuscripts and early editions of Hobbes.  It is quite impossible to guess in advance what will interest a man, but most men are capable of a keen interest in something or other, and when once such an interest has been aroused their life becomes free from tedium.  Very specialised interests are, however, a less satisfactory source of happiness than a general zest for lffe, since they can hardly fill the whole of a man's time, and there is always the danger that he may come to know all there is to know about the particular matter that has become his hobby. 

lt will be remembered that among our different types at the banquet we included the gormandiser, whom we were not prepared to praise.  The reader may think that the man with zest whom we have been praising does not differ in any definable way from the gormandiser.  The time has come when we must try to make the distinction between the two types more definite.

The ancients, as everyone knows, regarded moderation as one of the essential virtues.  Under the influence of romanticism and the French Revoiution this view was abandoned by many, and overmastering passions were admired, even if, like those of Byron's heroes, they were of a destructive and anti-sociai kind.  The ancients, however, were clearly in the right.  In the good life these must be a balance between different activities, and no one of them must be carried so far as to make the others impossible.  The gormandiser sacrifices all other pleasures to that of eating, and by so doing diminishes the total happiness of his life.  Many other passions besides eating may be carried to a like excess.  The Empress Josephine was a gormandiser in regard to clothes.  At first Napoleon used to pay her dressmaker's bills, though with continually increasing protest.  At last he told her that she really must learn moderation, and that in future he would only pay her bills when the amount seemed reasonable.  When her next dressmaker's bill came in, she was for a moment at her wits' end, but presently she bethought herself of a scheme.  She went to the War Minister and demanded that he should pay her bill out of the funds provided for the war.  Since he knew that she had the power to get him dismissed, he did so, and the French lost Genoa in consequence.  So at least some books say, though I am not prepared to vouch for the exact truth of the story.  For our purpose it is equally apt whether true or an exaggeration, since it serves to show how far the passion for clothes may carry a woman who has the opportunity to indulge it.  Dipsomaniacs and nymphomaniacs are obvious examples of the same kind of thing.  The principle in these matters is fairly obvious.  All our separate tastes and desires have to fit into the general framework of life.  If they are to be a source of happiness they must be compatible with health, with the affection of those whom we love, and with the respect of the society in which we live.  Some passions can be indulged to almost any extent without passing beyond these limits, others cannot.  The man, let us say, who loves chess, if he happens to be a bachelor with independent means, need not restrict his passion in any degree, whereas if he has a wife and children and no independent means, he will have to restrict it very severely.  The dipsomaniac and the gormandiser, even if they have no social ties, are unwise from a self-regarding point of view, since their indulgence interferes with health, and gives them hours of misery in return for minutes of pleasure.  Certain things form a framework within which any separate passion must live if it is not to become a source of misery.  Such things are health, the general possession of one's faculties, a sufficient income to provide for necessaries, and the most essential social duties, such as those towards wife and children.  The man who sacrifices these things for chess is essentially as bad as tbe dipsomaniac.  The only reason we do not condemn him so severely is that he is much less common, and that only a man of somewhat rare abilities is likely to be carried away by absorption in so intellectual a game.  The Greek formulla of moderation practically covers these cases.  

The man who likes chess sufficiently to look forward throughout his working day to the game that he will play in the evening is fortunate, but the man who gives up work in order to play chess all day has lost the virtue of moderation.  It is recorded that Tolstoy, in his younger and unregenerate days, was awarded the military cross for valour in the field, but when the time came for him to be presented with it, he was so absorbed in a game of chess that he decided not to go.  We can hardly find fault with Tolstoy on this account, since to him it might well be a matter of indifference whether he won military decorations or not, but in a lesser man such an act would have been one of folly. 


As a limitation upon the doctrine that has just been set forth, it ought to be admitted that some performances are considered so essentially noble as to justify the sacrifice of everything else on their behalf.  The man who loses his life in the defence of his country is not blamed if thereby his wife and children are left penniless.  The man who is engaged in experiments with a view to some great scientific discovery or invention is not blamed afterwards for the poverty that he has made his family endure, provided that his efforts are crowned with ultimate success.  If, however, he never succeeds in making the discovery or the invention that he was attempting, public opinion condemns him as a crank, which seems unfair, since no one in such an enterprise can be sure of success in advance.  During the first milennium of the Christian era a man who abandoned his family for a saintiy life was praised, though nowadays it would be held that he ought to make some provision for them.

I think there is always some deep seated psychological difference between the gormandiser and the man of healthy appetite.  The man in whom one desire runs to excess at the expense of all others is usually a man with some deep seated trouble, who is seeking to escape from a spectre.  In the case of the dipsomaniac this is obvious: men drink in order to forget.  If they had no spectres in their lives, they would not find drunkenness more agreeable than sobriety.  As the legendary Chinaman said:  'Me no drinkee for drinkee, me drinkee for drunkee.'  This is typical of all excessive and one-sided passions.  It is not pleasure in the object itself that is sought, but oblivion.  There is, however, a very great difference according as oblivion is sought in a sottish manner or by the exercise of faculties in themselves desirable.  Borrow's friend who taught himself Chinese in order to be able to endure the loss of his wife was seeking oblivion, but he sought it in an activity that had no harmful effects, but on the contrary improved his intelligence and his knowledge.  Against such forms of escape there is nothing to be said.  It is otherwise with the man who seeks oblivion in drinking or gambling or any other form of unprofitable excitement.  There are, it is true, border-line cases.  What should we say of the man who runs mad risks in aeroplanes or on mountain tops, because life has become irksome to him?  If his risks serve any public object, we may admire him, but it not, we shail have to place him only slightly above the gambler and drunkard. 

Genuine zest, not the sort that is really a search for oblivion, is part of the natural make-up of human beings except in so far as it has been destroyed by unfortunate circumstances.  Young children are interested in everything that they see and hear; the world is full of surprises to them, and they are perpetually engaged with ardour in the pursuit of knowledge, not, of course, of scholastic knowledge, but of the sort that consists in acquiring familiarity with the objects that attract their attention.  Animals, even when adult, retain their zest provided they are in health.  A cat in an unfamiliar room will not sit down until it has sniffed at every corner on the off-chance that there may be a smell of mouse somewhere.  The man who has never been fundamentally thwarted will retain his natural interest in the external world, and so long as he retains it he will find life plesant unless his liberty is unduly curtailed.  Loss of zest in civilised society is very largely due to the restrictions upon liberty which are essential to our way of life.  The savage hunts when he is hungry, and in so doing is obeying a direct impulse.  The man who goes to his work every morning at a certain hour is actuated fundamentally by the same impulse, namely the need to secure a living, but in his case the impulse does not operate directly and at the moment when it is felt: it operates indirectly through abstractions, beliefs and volitions.  At the moment when the man starts off to his work he is not feeling hungry, since he has just had his breakfast.  He merely knows that hunger will recur, and that going to his work is a means of satisfying future hunger.  Impulses are irregular, whereas habits, in a civilised society, have to be regular.  Among savages, even collective enterprises, in so far as they exist, are spontaneous and impulsive.  When the tribe is going to war the tom-tom' rouses military ardour, and herd excitement inspires each individual to the necessary activity.  Modern enterprises cannot be managed in this way.  When a train has to be started at a given moment it is impossible to inspire the porters, the engine-dyiver, and the signalman by means of barbaric music.  They must each do their job merely because it has to be done; their motive, that is to say, is indirect: they have no impulse towards the activity, but only towards the ultimate reward of the activity.  A great deal of social life has the same defect.  People converse with each other, not from any wish to do so, but because of some ultimate benefit that they hope to derive from cooperation.  At every moment of life the civilised man is hedged about by restrictions of impulse: if he happens to feel cheerful he must not sing or dance in the street, while if he happens to feel sad he must not sit on the pavement and weep, for fear of obstructing pedestrian traffic.  In youth his liberty is restricted at school, in adult life it is restricted throughout his working hours.  All this makes zest more difficult to retain, for the continual restraint tends to produce weariness and boredom.  Nevertheless, a civilised society is impossible without a very considerable degree of restraint upon spontaneous impulse, since spontaneous impulse will only produce the simplest forms of social cooperation, not those highly complex forms which modern economic organisation demands.  In order to rise above these obstacles to zest a man needs health and superabundant energy, or else, if he has that good fortune, work that he finds interesting on its own account.  Health, so far as statistics can show, has been steadily improving in all civilised countries during the last hundred years, but energy is more difficult to measure, and I am doubtful whether physical vigour in moments of health is as great as it was formerly.  The problem here is to a great extent a social probem, and as such I do not propose to discuss it in the present volume.  The problem has, however, a personal and psychological aspect which we have already discussed in connection with fatigue.  Some men retain their zest in spite of the handicaps of civilised life, and many men could do so if they were free from the inner psychological confliicts upon which a great part of their energy is expended.  Zest demands energy more than that sufflcient for the necessary work, and this in turn demands the smooth working of the psychological machine.  Of the causes promoting the smooth working I shall have more to say in later chapters.  


In women, less nowadays than formerley, but still to a very large extent, zest has been greatly diminished by a mistaken conception of respectability.  It was thought undesirable that women should take an obvious interest in men, or that they should display too much vivacity in public.  In learning not to be interested in men they learned very frequently to be interested in nothing, or at any rate in nothing except a certain kind of correct behaviour.  To teach an attitude of inactivity and withdrawal towards life is clearly to teach something very inimical to zest, and to encourage a certain kind of absorption in self which is characteristic of highly respectable women, especially when they are uneducated.  They do not have the interest in sport that average men have, they care nothing about politics, towards men their attitude is one of prim aloofness, towards women their attitude is one of veiled hostility based upon the conviction that other women are less respectable than they are themselves.  They boast that they keep themselves to themselves; that is to say, their lack of interest in their fellow creatures appears to them in the light of a virtue.  For this, of course, they are not to blame; they are only accepting the moral teaching that has been current for thousands of years where women are concerned.  They are, however, victims, much to be pitied, of a system of repression whose iniquity they have failed to perceive.  To such women all that is ungenerous appears good and all that is generous appears evil.  In their own social circle they do what they can to kill joy, in politics they love repressive legislation.  Fortunately the type is growing less common, but it is still far more prevalent than is supposed by those who live in emancipated circles.  I recommend  anyone who doubts this statement to go the round of a number of lodging-houses seeking a lodging, and to take note of the landladies that he will meet during his search.  He will find that they are living by a conception of female excellence which involves as an essential part the destruction of all zest for life, and that their minds and hearts are dwarfed and stunted as a result.  Between male and female excellence rightly conceived there is no difference, or at any rate no difference such as tradition inculcates.  For women as for men zest is the secret of happiness and well-being.
