Chapter 7: The sense of sin

Concerning the sense of sin we have already in Chapter I had occaision to say something, but we must now go into it more fully, since it is one of the most important of the underlying psychological causes of unhappiness in adult life.   There is a traditional religious psychology of sin which no modern psychologist can accept.  It was supposed, especially by Protestants, that conscience reveals to every man when an act to which he is tempted is sinful, and that after committing such an act he may experience either of two painful feelings, one called remorse, in which there is no merit, and the other called repentance, which is capable of wiping out his guilt.  In Protestant countries even many of those who lost their faith continued for a time to accept with greater or smaller modifications the orthodox view of sin.  In our own day, partly owing to psycho-analysis, we have the opposite state of affairs: not only do the unorthodox reject the old doctrine of sin, but many of those who still consider themselves orthodox do so likewise.  Conscience has ceased to be something mysterious which, because it was mysterious, could be regarded as the voice of God.  We know that conscience enjoins different acts in different parts of the worid, and,that broadly speaking it is everywhere in agreement with tribal custom.  What, then, is really happening when a man's conscience pricks him? 




The word 'conscience' covers. as a matter of fact, several different feelings; the simplest of these is the fear of being found out.   You, reader, have, I am sure, lived a completely blameless life, but if you will ask someone who has at some time acted in a manner for which he would be punished if it became known, you will find that, when discovery seemed imminent, the person in question repented of his crime.  I do not say that this would apply to the professional thief who expects a certain amount of prison as a trade risk, but it applies to what may be called the respetable offender, such as the Bank Manager who has embezzled in a moment of stress, or the clergyman who has been tempted by passion into some sensual irregularity.  Such men can forget their crime when there seems little chance of detection, but when they are found out, or in grave danger of being so, they wish they had been more virtuous, and this wish may give them a lively sense of the enormity of their sin.  Closely allied with this feeling is the fear of becoming an outcast from the herd.  A man who cheats at cards or fails to pay his debts of honour has nothing within himself by which to stand up against the disapproval of the herd when he is found out.  In this he is unlike the religious innovator, the anarchist, and the revolutionary, who all feel that, whatever may be their fate in the present, the future is with them and will honour them as much as they are execrated in the present.  These men, in spite of the hostility of the herd, do not feel sinful, but the man who entirely accepts the morality of the herd while acting against it suffers great unhappiness when he loses caste, and the fear of this disaster, or the pain of it when it has happened, may easily cause him to regard his acts themselves as sinful. 

But the sense of sin in its most important forms is something which goes deeper.  It is something which has its roots in the unconscious, and does not appear in consciousness as fear of other people's disapproval.  In consciousness certain kinds of acts are labelled Sin for no reason visible to introspection.  When a man commits these acts he feels uncomfortable without quite knowing why.  He wishes he were the kind of man who could abstain from what he believes to be sin.  He gives moral admiration only to those whom he believes to be pure in heart.  He recognises with a greater or less degree of regret that it is not for him to be a saint; indeed, his conception of saintship is probably one which it is nearly impossible to carry out in an ordinary everyday life.  Consequently he goes through life with a sense of guilt, feeling that the best is not for him, and that his highest moments are those of maudlin penitence.

The source of all this in practically every case is the moral teaching which the man received before he was six years old at the hands of his mother or his nurse.  He learned before that age that it is wicked to swear, and not quite nice to use any but the most ladylike language, that only bad men drink, and that tobacco is incompatible with the highest virtue.  He learned that one should never tell a lie.  And above all he learned that any interest in the sexual parts is an abomination.  He knew these to be the view of his mother, and believed them to be those of his Creator.   To be affectionately treated by his mother, or, if she was neglectful by his nurse, was the greatest pleasure of his life, and was only obtainable when he had not been known to sin against the moral code.  He therefore came to associate something vaguely awful with any conduct of which his mother or nurse would disapprove.   Graduany as he grew older he forgot where his moral code had come from and what had originally been the penalty for disobeying it, but he did not throw off the moral code or cease to feel that something dreadful was liable to happen to him if he infringed it. 

 Now very large parts of this infantile moral teaching are devoid of all rational foundation and such as cannot be applied to the ordinary behaviour of ordinary men.  A man who uses what is called 'bad language', for example, is not from a rational point of view any worse than a man who does not.   Nevertheless, practically everybody in trying to imagine a saint would consider abstinence from swearing as essential.  Considered in the light of reason this is simply silly.  The same applies to alcohol and tobacco.  With regard to alcohol the feeling does not exist in Southern countries, and indeed there is an element of impiety about it, since it is known that Our Lord and the Apostles drank wine.  With regard to tobacco it is easier to maintain a negative position since all the greatest saints lived before its use was known.  But here also no rational argument is possible.  The view that no saint would smoke is based in the last analysis upon the view that no saint would do anything solely because it gave him pleasure.  This ascetic element in ordinary morality has become almost unconscrous but it operates in all kinds of ways that make our moral code irrational.   In a rational ethic it will be held laudable to give pleasure to anyone, even to oneself, provided there is no counter-balancing pain to oneself or to others.  The ideally virtuous man, if we had got rid of ascetism, would be the man who permits the enjoyment of an good things whenever there is no evil consequence to outweigh the enjoyment.  Take again the question of lying.  I do not deny that there is a great deal too much lying in the world, and that we should all be the too much better for an increase of truthfulness, but I do deny, as I think every rational person must, that lying is in no circumstances justified. I once in the course of a country walk saw a tired fox at the last stages of exhaustion still forcing himself to run.  A few minutes afterwards I saw the hunt.  They asked me if I had seen the fox, and I said I had.  They asked me which way he had gone, and I lied to them. I do not think I should have been a better man if I had told the truth.

 But it is above all in the realm of sex that early moral teaching does harm. Å@If a child has been conventionally educated by somewhat stern parents or nurses, the association between sin and the sex organs is so firmly established by the time he is six years old that it is unlikely ever to be completely undone throughout the rest of his life.  This feeling is, of course, reinforced by the Oedipus complex, since the woman most loved in childhood is one with whom all sexual freedoms are impossible.  The result is that many adult men feel women to be degraded by sex, and cannot respect their wives unless their wives hate sexual intercourse.  But the man whose wife is cold will be driven by instinct to seek instinctive satisfaction elsewhere.  His instinctive satisfaction, however, even if he momentarily finds it, will be poisoned by the sense of guilt, so that he cannot be happy in any relation with a woman, whether in marriage or outside it.  On the woman's side the same sort of thing happens if she has been very emphatically taught to be what is called 'pure'.  She instinctively holds herself back in her sexual relations with her husband, and is afraid of deriving any pleasure from them.  In the present day, however, there is very much less of this on the part of women than there was fifty years ago.  I should say that at present among educated people the sex life of men is more contorted and more poisoned by the sense of sin than that of women.  
 There is beginning to be widespread awareness, though not of course on the part of public authorities, of the evils of traditional sex education in regard to the very young.  The right rule is simple: until a child is nearing the age of puberty teach him or her no sexual morality whatever, and carefully avoid instilling the idea that there is anything disgusting in the natural bodily functions.  As the time approaches when it becomes necessary to give moral instruction, be sure that it is rational, and that at every point you can give good grounds for what you say.  But it is not on education that I wish to speak in this book.  In this book I am concerned rather with what the adult can do to minimise the evil effects of unwise education in causing an irrational sense of sin. 
 
 The problem here is the same as has confronted us in earlier chapters, namely that of compelling the unconscious to take note of the rational beliefs that govern our conscious thought.  Men must not allow themselves to be swayed by their moods, believing one thing at one moment and another at another.  The sense of sin is especially prominent at moments when the conscious will is weakened by fatigue, by illness, by drink, or by any other cause.  What a man feels at these moments (unless caused by drink) is supposed to be a revelation from his higher self.  'The devil was sick, the devil a saint would be.'  But it is absurd to suppose that moments of weakness give more insight than moments of strength.  In moments of weakness it is difficult to resist infantile suggestions, but there is no reason whatsoever for regarding such suggestions as preferable to the belief of the adult man when in full possession of his faculties.  On the contrary, what a man deliberately believes with his whole reason when he is vigorous ought to be to him the norm as to what he had better believe at all times.  It is quite possible to overcome infantile suggestions of the unconscious, and even to change the contents of the unconscious, by employing the right kind of technique.  Whenever you begin to feel remorse for an act which your reason tells you is not wicked, examine the causes of your feeling of remorse, and convince yourself in detail of their absurdity.  Let your conscious beliefs be so vivid and emphatic that they make an impression upon your unconscious strong enough to cope with the impressions made by your nurse or your mother when you were an infant.  Do not be content with an alternation between moments of rationality and moments of irrationaiity. Look into the irrationality closely, with a determination not to respect it, and not to let it dominate you.  Whenever it thrusts foolish thoughts or feelings into your consciousness, pull them up by the roots, examine them, and reject them.  Do not allow yourself to remain a vacillating creature, swayed half by reason and half by infantile folly.  Do not be afraid of irreverence towards the memory of those who controlled your childhood.  They seemed to you then strong and wise because you were weak and foolish; now that you are neither, it is your business to examine their apparent strength and wisdom, to consider whether they deserve that reverence that from force of habit you still bestow upon them.  Ask yourself seriously whether the world is the better for the moral teaching traditionally given to the young.  Consider how much of unadulterated superstition goes into the make-up of the conventionally virtuous man, and reflect that, while all kinds of imaginary moral dangers were guarded against by incredibly foolish prohibitions,the real moral dangers to which an adult is exposed were practically unmentioned.  What are the really harmful acts to which the average man is tempted?  Sharp practice in business of the sort not punished by law, harshness towards employees, cruelty towards wife and children, malevolence towards competitors, ferocity in political conflicts - these are the really harmful sins that are common among respectable and respected citizens.  By means of these sins a man spreads misery in his immediate circle and does his bit towards destroying civilisation.  Yet these are not the things that make him, when he is ill, regard himself as an outcast who has forfeited all claim to divine favour.  These are not the things that cause him nightmares to see visions of his mother bending reproachful glances upon him.  Why is his subconscious morality thus divorced from reason?  Because the ethic believed in by those who had charge of his infancy was silly; because it was not derived from any study of the individual's duty to the community; because it was made up of old scraps of irrational taboos; and because it contained within itself elements of morbidness derived from the spiritual sickness that troubled the dying Roman Empire.  Our nominal morality has been formulated by priests and mentally enslaved women.  It is time that men who have to take a normal part in the normal life of the world learned to rebel against this sickly nonsense. 

But if the rebellion is to be successful in bringing individual happiness and in enabling a man to live consistently by one standard, not to vacillate between two, it is necessary that he should think and feel deeply about what his reason tells him.   Most men, when they have thrown off superficially the superstitions of their childhood, think that there is no more to be done.  They do not realise that these superstitions are still lurking underground.  When a rational conviction has been arrived at, it is necessary to dwell upon it, to follow out its consequences, to search out in oneself whatever beliefs inconsistent with the new conviction might otherwise survive, and when the sense of sin grows strong, as from time to time it will, to treat it not as a revelation and a call to higher things, but as a disease and a weakness, unless of course it is caused by some act which a rational ethic would condemn.  I am not suggesting that a man should be destitute of morality, I am only suggesting that he should be destitute of superstitious morality, which is a very difierent thing. 

But even when a man has offended against his own rational code, I doubt whether a sense of sin is the 'best method of arriving at a better way of life.  There is in the sense of sin something abject, something lacking in self-respect.  No good was ever done to anyone by the loss of self-respect. The rational man will regard his own undesirable acts as he regaxds those of others, as acts produced by certain circumstances, and to be avoided eithet by a fuller realisation that they are undesirable, or, where this is possible, by avoidance of the circumstances that caused them.

As a matter of fact the sense of sin, so far from beimg a cause of s good life, is quite the reverse.  It makes a man unhappy and it makes him feel inferior.  Being unhappy, he is likely to make claims upon other people which are excessive and which prevent him from enjoying happiness in personal relations.  Feeling inferior, he wiil have a grudge against those who seem superior.  He will find admiration difficult and envy easy.  He will become a generally disageeable person, and will find himself more and more solitary.  An expansive and generous attitude towards other people not only gives happiness to others, but is an immense source of happhess to its possesser, since it causes him to be generally liked.  But such an attitude is scarcely possible to the man haunted by a sense of sin.  It is an outcome of poise and self-reliance; it demands what may be called mental integration; by which I mean that the various  layess of a man's nature, conscious, subconscious, and unconscious, work together harmoniously and are not engaged in perpetual battle.  To produce such harmony is possible in most cases by wise education, but where education has been unwise it is a more difficult process.  It is the process which the psycho-analysts attempt, but I believe that in a very great many cases the patient can himself perform the work which in more extreme cases requires the help of the expert.  Do not say, 'I have no time for such psychoiogical labours; my life is a busy one filled with affairs, and I must leave my unconscious to its tricks.'  Nothing so much diminishes not only happiness but efficiency as a personality divided against itself.  The time spent in producing harmony between the different parts of one's personality is time usefully employed.  I do not suggest that a man should set apart, say, an hour a day for self-examination.  This is to my mind by no means the best method, since it increases self-absorption, which is part of the disease to be cured, for a harmonious personality is directed outward.  What I suggest is that a man should make up his mind with emphasis as to what he rationally believes, and should never allow contrary irrational beliefs to pass unchallenged or obtain a hold over him, however brief.  This is a question of reasoning with himself in those moments in which he is tempted to become infantile, but the reasoning, if it is sufficiently emphatic, may be very brief.  The time involved, therefore, should be negligible. 

There is in many people a dislike of rationality, and where this exists the kind of thing that I have been saying will seem irrelevant and unimportant.  There is an idea that rationality, if allowed free play, will kill all the deeper emotions.  This belief appears to me to be due to an entirely erroneous conception of the function of reason in human life.  It is not the business of reason to generate emotions, though it may be part of its function to discover ways of preventing such emotions as are an obstacle to well-being.  To find ways of minimizing hatred and envy is no doubt part of the function of a rational psychology.  But it is a mistake to suppose that in minimizing these passions we shall at the same time diminish the strength of those passions which reason does not condemn.  In passionate love, in parental affecttion, in friendship, in benevolence, in devotion to science or art, there is nothing that reason should wish to diminish.  The rational man, when he feels any or all of these emotions, will be glad that he feels them and will do nothing to lessen their strength, for all these emotions are parts of the good life, the life, that is, that makes for happiness both in oneself and in others.  There is nothing irrational in the passions as such, and many irrational people feel only the most trivial passions.  No man need fear that by making himself rational he will make his life dull.  On the contrary, since rationality consists in the main of internal harmony, the man who achieves it is freer in his contemplation of the world and in the use of his energies to achieve external purposes than is the man who is perpetually hampered by inward conflicts.  Nothing is so dull as to be encased in self, nothing so exhilarating as to have attention and energy directed outwards. 

Our traditional morality has been unduly self-centred, and the conception of sin is part of this unwise focusing of attention upon self.  To those who have never passed through the subjective moods induced by this faulty morality, reason may be unnecessary.  But to those who have once acquired the sickness, reason is necessary in effecting a cure.  And perhaps the sickuess is a necessary stage in mental development.  I am inclined to think that the man who has passed beyond it by the help of reason has reached a higher level than the man who has never experienced either the sickness or the cure.  The hatred of reason which is common in our time is very largely due to the fact that the operations of reason are not conceived in a sufficiently fundamental way.  The man divided against himself looks for excitement and distraction; he loves strong passions, not for sound reasons, but because for the moment they take him outside himself and prevent the painful necessity of thought.  Any passion is to him a form of intoxication, and since he cannot conceive of fundamental happiness, all relief from pain appears to him solely possible in the form of intoxication.  This, however, is the symptom of a deepseated malady. Where there is no such malady, the greatest happiness comes with the most complete possession of one's faculties. It is in the moments when the mind is most active and the fewest things are forgotten that the most intense joys are experienced.  This, indeed, is one of the best touchstones of happiness.  The happiness that requires intoxication of no matter what sort is a spurious and unsatisfying kind. The happiness that is genuinely satisfying is accompanied by the fullest exercise of our faculties, and the fullest realisation of the world in which we live. 
