Chapter 10: Is happiness still possible?
 


So far we have been considering the unhappy man; we now have the pleasanter task of considering the happy man.  From the conversation and the books of some of my friends I have been almost led to conclude that happiness in the modern world has become an impossibility.  I find, however, that this view tends to be dissipated by introspection, foreign travel, and the conversation of my gardener.  The unhappiness of my literary friends I have considered in an earlier chapter; in the present chapter I wish to make a survey of the happy people that I have come across in the course of my life. 

Happiness is of two sorts, though, of course, there are intermediate degrees.  The two sorts I mean might be distinguished as plain and fancy, or animal and spiritual, or of the heart and of the head.  The designation to be chosen among these alternatives depends, of course, upon the thesis to be proved.  I am at the moment not concerned to prove any thesis, but merely to describe.  Perhaps the simplest way to describe the difference between the two sorts of happiness is to say that one sort is open to any human being, and the other only to those who can read and write.  When I was a boy I  knew a man bursting with happiness whose business was digging wells.  He was of enormous height and of incredible muscles; he could neither read nor write, and when in the year 1885 he got a vote for Parliament, he learnt for the first time that such an institution existed.  His happiness did not depend upon intellectual sources; it was not based upon belief in natural law, or the perfectibility of the species, or the public ownership of public utilities, or the ultimate triumph of the Seventh Day Adventists, or any of the other creeds which intellectuals consider necessary to their enjoyment of life.  It was based upon physical vigour, a sufficiency of work, and the overcoming of not insuperable obstacles in the shape of rock.  The happiness of my gardener is of the same species; he wages a perennial war against rabbits, of which he speaks exactly as Scotland Yard speaks of Bolsheviks; he considers them dark, designing and ferocious, and is of the opinion that they can only be met by means of a cunning equal to their own.  Like the heroes of Valhalla who spent every day hunting a certain wild boar, which they'killed every evening but which miraculously came to life again in the moming, my gardener can slay his enemy one day without any fear that the enemy will have disappeared the next day.  Although well over seventy, he works all day and bicycles sixteen hilly miles to and from his work, but the fount of joy is inexhaustible, and it is 'they rabbits' that supply it. 

But, you will say, these simple delights are not open to superior people like ourselves.  What joy can we experience in waging war on such puny creatures as rabbits?  The argument, to my mind, is a poor one.  A rabbit is very much larger than a yellow-fever bacillus, and yet a superior person can find happiness in making war upon the latter.  Pleasures exactly similar to those of my gardener so far as their emotional content is concerned are open to the most highly educated people.  The difference made by education is only in regard to the activities by which these pleasures are to be obtained.  Pleasures of achievement demand difficulties such that beforehand success seems doubtful although in the end it is usually achieved.  This is perhaps the chief reason why a not exccssive estimate of one's own powers is a source of happiness.  The man who underestimates himself is perpetually being surprised by success, whereas the man who overestimates himself is just as often surprised by failure.  The former kind of surprise is pleasant, the latter unpleasant. It is therefore wise to be not unduly conceited, though also not too modest to be enterprising. 

Of the more highly educated sections of the community, the happiest in the present day are the men of science. Å@Many of the most eminent of them are emotionally simple, and obtain from their work a satisfaction so profound that they can derive pleasure from eating and even marrying.  Artists and literary men consider it de rigueur to be unhappy in their marriages, but men of science quite frequently remain capable of old-fashioned domestic bliss.  The reason for this is that the higher parts of their intelligence are wholly absorbed by their work, and are not alowed to intrude into regions where they have no functions to perform.  In their work they are happy because in the modern world science is progressive and powerful, and because its importance is not doubted either by themselves or by laymen.  They have therefore no necessity for complex emotions, since the simpler emotions meet with no obstacles.  Complexity in emotions is like foam in a river.  It is produced by obstacles which break the smoothly flowing current.  But so long as the vital energies are unimpeded, they produce no ripple on the surface, and their strength is not evident to the unobservant.  
All the conditions of happiness are realised in the life of the man of science.  He has an activity which utilises his abilities to the full, and he achieves results which appear important not only to himself but to the general public, even when it cannot in the smallest degree understand them.  In this he is more fortunate than the artist.  When the public cannot understand a picture or a poem, they conclude that it is a bad picture or a bad poem.  When they cannot understand the theory of relativity they conclude (rightly) that their education has been insufficient.  Consequently Einstein is honoured while the best painters are left to starve in garrets, and Einstein is happy while the painters are unhappy.  Very few men can be genuinely happy in a life involving continual self-assertion against the scepticism of the mass of mankind, unless they can shut themselves up in a coterie and forget the cold outer world.  The man of science has no need of a coterie, since he is thought well of by everybody except his colleagues.  The artist, on the contrary, is in the painful situation of having to choose between being despised and being despicable.  If his powers are of the first order, he must incur one or the other of these misfortunes - the former if he uses his powers, the latter if he does not.  This has not been the case always and everywhere.  There have been times when even good artists, even when they were young, were thought well of.  Julius II, though he might ill-treat Michael Angelo, never supposed him incapable of painting pictures.  The modern millionaire, though he may shower wealth upon elderly artists after they have lost their powers, never imagines that their work is as important as his own.  Perhaps these circumstances have something to do with the fact that artists are on the average less happy than men of science. 

It must, I think, be admitted that the most intelligent young people in Westem countries tend to have that kind of unhappiness that comes of finding no adequate employment for their best talents.  This, however, is not the case in Eastern countries.  The intelligent young at the present day are probably happier in Russia than anywhere else in the world.  They have there a new world to create, and an ardent faith in accordance with which to create it.  The old have been executed, starved, exiled, or in some other way disinfected, so that they cannot, as in every Western country, compel the young to choose between doing harm and doing nothing.  To the sophisticated Occidental the faith of the young Russian may seem crude, but, after all, what is there to be said against it?  He is creathg a new world; the new world is to his liking; the new world will almost certainly, when created, make the average Russian happier than he was before the Revolution.  It may not be a world in which the sophisticated Western intellectual would be happy, but the sophisticated Western intellectual does not have to live in it.  By any pragmatic test, therefore, the faith of young Russia is justified, and to condemn it as crude can have no justification except on a basis of theory.  

In India, China, and Japan, external circumstances of a political sort interfere with the happiness of the young intelligentsia, but there is no such internal obstacle as exists in the West.  There are activities which appear important to the young, and, in so far as these activities succeed, the young are happy.  They feel that they have an important part to play in the national life, and aims to pursue which, though difficult, are not impossible to realise.  Cynicism such as one finds very frequently among the most highlly educated young men and women of the West results from the combination of comfort with powerlessness.  Powerlessness makes people feel that nothing is worth doing, and comfort makes the painfulness of this feeling just endurable.  Throughout the East the university student can hope for more influence upon public opinion than he can have in the modem West, but he has much less opportunity than in the West of securing a substantial income.  Being neither powerless nor comfortable, he becomes a reformer or a revolutionary, not a cynic.  The happiness of the reformer or revolutionary depends upon the course of public afrairs, but probably even while he is being executed he enjoys more real happiness than is possible for the comfortable cynic.  I remember a young Chinese visitor to my school who was going home to found a similar school in a reactionary part of China.  He expected the result to be that his head would be cut off.  Nevertheless he enjoyed a quiet happiness that I could only envy. 

I do not wish to suggest, however, that these high-flown kinds of happincss are the only possible ones.  They are in fact open only to a minority, since they require a kind of ability and a width of interest which cannot be very common.  It is not only eminent scientists who can derive pleasure through work, nor is it only leading statesmen who can derive pleasure through advocacy of a cause.  The pleasure of work is open to anyone who can develop some speciaiised skill, provided that he can get satisfaction from the exercise of his skill without demanding universal applause.  I knew a man who had lost the use of both legs in early youth, but he had remained serenely happy throughout a long life; he had achieved this by writing a work in five volumcs on rose blight, on which I always understood he was the leading expert.  I have not had the pleasure of knowing any large number of conchologists, but from those who have I have always understood that the study of shells brings contentment to those who engage in it.  I knew a man once who was the best compositor in the world, and was sought out by all those who devoted themselves to inventing artistic types; he derived joy, not so much from the very genuine respect in which he was held by persons whose respect was not lightly bestowed, as from the actual delight in the exercise of his craft, a delight not wholly unlike that which good dancers derive from dancing.  I have known also compositors who were experts in setting up mathematical type, or Nestorian script, or cuneiform, or anything else that was out of the way and difficult.  I did not discover whether these men's private lives were happy, but in their working hours their constructive instincts were fully gratified. 
 
 It is customary to say that in our machine age there is less room than formerly for the craftsman's joy in skilled work.  I am not at all sure that this is true: the skilled workman nowadays works, it is true, at quite different things from those that occupied the attention of the mediaeval guilds, but he is still very important and quite essential in the machine economy.  There are those who make scientific instruments and delicate machines, there are designers, there are aeroplane mechanics, chaufeurs, and hosts of others who have a trade in which skill can be developed to almost any extent.  The agricultural labourer and the peasant in comparatively primitive communities is not, so far as I have been able to observe, nearly as happy as a chaufieur or an engine-driver.  It is true that the work of the peasant who cultivates his own land is varied; he ploughs, he sows, he reaps.  But he is at the mercy of the elements, and is very conscious of his dependence, whereas the man who works a modern mechanism is conscious of power, and acquires the sense that man is the master, not the slave, of natural forces.  It is true, of course, that work is very uninteresting to the large body of mere machine-minders who repeat some mechanical operation over and over again with the minimum of variation, but the more uninteresting the work becomes, the more possible it is to get it performed by a machine.  The ultimate goal of machine production - from which, it is true, we are as yet far removed - is a system in which everything uninteresting is done by machines, and human beings are reserved for the work involving variety and initiative.  In such a world the work will be less boring and less depressing than it has been at any time since the introduction of agriculture.  In taking to agriculture mankind decided that they would submit to monotony and tedium in order to diminish the risk of starvation.  When men obtained their food by hunting, work was a joy, as one can see from the fact that the rich still pursue these ancestral occupations for amusement.  But with the introduction of agriculture mankind entered upon a long period of meanness, misery, and madness, from which they are only now being freed by the beneficent operation of the machine.  It is all very well for sentitmentalists to speak of contact with the soil and the ripe wisdom of Hardy's philosophic peasants, but the one desire of every young man in the countryside is to find work in towns where he can escape from the slavery of wind and weather and the solitude of dark winter evenings into the reliable and human atmosphere of the factory and the cinema.  Companionship and cooperation are essential elements in the happiness of the average man, and these are to be obtained in industry far more fully than in agriculture. 

Belief in a cause is a source of happiness to large numbers of people.  I am not thinking only of revolutionaries, socialists, nationalists in oppressed countries, and such; I am thinkng also of many humbler kinds of belief.  The men I have known who believed that the English were the lost ten tribes were almost invariably happy, while as for those who believed that the English were only the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, their bliss knew no bounds.  I am not suggesting that the reader should adopt this creed, since I cannot advocate any happiness based upon what seem to me to be false beliefs.  For the same reason I cannot urge the reader to believe that men should live exclusively upon nuts, although, so far as my observation goes, this belief invariably ensures perfect happiness.  But it is easy to find some cause which is in no degree fantastic, and those whose interest in any such cause is genuine are provided with an occupation for theitr leisure hours and a complete antidote to the feeling that life is empty. 
Not so very far removed from the devotion to obscure causes is absorption in a hobby.  One of the most eminent of living mathematicians divides his time equally between mathematics and stamp-ollecting.  I imagine that the latter affords consolation at the moments when he can make no progress with the former.  The difficulty of proving propositions in the theory of numbers is not the only sorrow that stamp-colllecting can cure, nor are stamps the only things that can be collected.  Consider what a vast field of ecstasy opens before the imagination when one thinks of old china, snuff-boxes, Roman coins, arrow-heads, and flint implements.  It is true that many of us are too 'superior' for these simple pleasures.  We have all experienced them in boyhood, but have thought them, for some reason, unworthy of a grown man.  This is a complete mistake; any pleasure that does no harm to other people is to be valued.  For my part, I collect rivers: I derive pleasure from having gone down the Volga and up the Yangtse, and regret very much having never seen the Amazon or the Orinoco.  Simple as these emotions are, I am not ashamed of them.  Or consider again the passionate joy of the baseball fan: he turns to his newspaper with avidity, and the radio affords him the keenest thrills.  I remember meeting for the first time one of the leading literary men of America, a man whom I had supposed from his books to be filled with melancholy.  But it so happened that at that moment the most crucial baseball results were coming through on the radio; he forgot me, literature, and all the other sorrows of our sublunary life, and yelled with joy as his favourites achieved victory.  Ever since this incident I have been able to read his books without feeling depressed by the misfortunes of his characters. 
Fads and hobbies, however, are in many cases, perhaps most, not a source of fundamental happiness, but a means of escape from reality, of forgetting for the moment some pain too difficult to be faced.  Fundamental happiness depends more than anything else upon what may be called a friendly interest in persons and things. 


 
A friendly interest in persons is a form of affectionateness, but not the form which is grasping and possessive and seeking always an emphatic response.  This latter form is very frequently a source of unhappiness.  The kind that makes for happiness is the kind that likes to observe people and finds pleasure in their iudividual traits, that wishes to afford scope for the interests and pleasures of those with whom it is brought into contact without desiring to acquire power over them or to secure their enthusiastic admiration.  The person whose attitude towards others is genuinely of this kind will be a source of happiness and a recipient of reciprocal kindness.  His relations with others, whether slight or serious, will satisfy both his interests and his affections; he will not be soured by ingratitude, since he will seldom suffer it and will not notice when he does.  The same idiosyncrasies which would get on another man's nerves to the point of exasperation will be to him a source of gentle amusement.  He will achieve without effort results which another man, after long struggles, will find to be unattainable.  Being happy in hiimelf, he will be a pleasant companion, and tbis in turn will increase his happiness.  But all this must be genuine; it must not spring from an idea of self-sacrifice inspired by a sense of duty.  A sense of duty is useful in work, but offensive in personal relations.  People wish to be liked, not to be endured with patient resignation.  To like many people spontaneously and without effort is perhaps the greatest of all sources of personal happiness. 

I spoke also in the last paragraph of what I call a friendly interest in things.  This phrase may perhaps seem forced; it may be said that it is impossible to feel friendly to things.  Nevertheless, there is something analogous to friendliness in the kind of interest that a geologist takes in rocks, or an archaeologist in ruins, and this iuterest ought to be an element in our attitude to individuals or societies.  It is possible to have an interest in things which is hostile rather than friendly.  A man might collect facts concerning the habitats of spiders because he hated spiders and wished to live where they were few.  This kind of interest would not afford the same satisfaction as the geologist derives from his rocks.  An interest in impersonal things, though perhaps less valuable as an ingredient in everyday happiness than a friendly attitude towards our fellow creatures, is nevertheless very important.  The world is vast and our own powers are limited.  If all our happiuess is bound up entirely in our personal circumstances it is difficult not to demand of life more than it has to give.  And to demand too much is the surest way of getting even less than is possible.  The man who can forget his worries by means of a genuine interest in, say, the Council of Trent, or the life history of stars, will find that, when he returns from his excursion into the impersonal world, he has acquired a poise and calm which enable him to deal with his worries in the best way, and he will in the meantime have experienced a genuine even if temporary happiness.  

The secret of happiness is this: let your interests be as wide as possible, and let your reactions to the things and persons that interest you be as far as possible friendly rather than hostile.  
This preliminary survey of the possibilities of happiness will be expanded in subsequent chapters, together with suggestions as to ways of escaping from psychological sources of misery. 
